# Works Cited
“11% of Canadians Aged 15-24 Met Criteria for Depression: StatsCan.” CBC News, CBC, 18 Jan. 2017, www.cbc.ca/news/health/depression-suicidal-thoughts-1.3940621. This 2017 CBC News report is based on 4,031 respondents aged 15 to 24, which when extrapolated represents more than 4.4 million young people. It reveals a disturbingly high number of young Canadians (aged 15-24) experiencing depression (11%). The report further emphasizes the severity of the issue by highlighting that suicide, often linked to depression, is the second leading cause of death in this age group. One limitation of this study is that it doesn’t delve into the causes of depression, so it’s unclear why these youth were suffering from depression. Nevertheless, it underscores the critical role of identifying risk factors associated with depression and suicidal thoughts. This focus on depression aligns well with my research question, which explores potential contributing factors to youth suicide risk, particularly the role of social rejection during childhood and its potential link to depression.

Bentzinger, Jacob. “A Man Standing in Front of a Crowd at a Concert.” Unsplash, 5 Apr. 2020, unsplash.com/photos/a-man-standing-in-front-of-a-crowd-at-a-concert-wwkBOF6h0fI.
Berthold, Jess. “Screen Time Tied to Suicide Risk for Tweens – but Don’t Panic.” University of California San Francisco, University of California San Francisco, 2 Mar. 2023, www.ucsf.edu/news/2023/03/424931/screen-time-tied-suicide-risk-tweens-dont-panic. This article by Jess Berthold explains how the findings of Jason Nagata, MD, of UCSF Benioff Children Hospitals, prove the correlation between screen time and suicide risk among tweens. Nagata’s studies found that "each hour of screen time increases the risk of suicidal behaviors by 9%", and children who use screens more frequently between ages 9-11 are more likely to engage in suicidal behaviors at ages 11-13. Berthold argues that screen time displaces beneficial activities for mental health, while increasing exposure to risks like cyberbullying and disrupted sleep. While the article clearly illustrates these points, it also acknowledges limitations in Nagata’s research–the inability to distinguish attempts from thoughts, and uncertainty around whether screen use itself contributes to suicidality or if depressed children are simply more prone to greater screen engagement. This study incorporates valuable information that will benefit my study, as it directly addresses my hypothesis and provides clear answers and results.

Carnegie, Tom. “White and Red Flag on Black Pole.” Unsplash, 25 Jan. 2021, unsplash.com/photos/white-and-red-flag-on-black-pole-7k294YFeVbI.

Government of Canada, Statistics Canada. “Leading Causes of Death, Total Population, by Age Group.” Statistics Canada, Statistics Canada, 27 Nov. 2023, www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=1310039401. The most common causes of death in Canada, broken down by age group, are shown in detail in the data table “Leading causes of death, total population, by age group” from Statistics Canada. When examining individuals between the ages of 15 and 24, the data indicates that “Intentional self-harm (suicide)” was the second most common cause of death on a consistent basis between 2018 and 2022. An important trend is the annual decline in suicide-related deaths in this age group. This statistical resource offers a thorough overview of the scope and trends of the problem, making it extremely relevant and valuable for my research on the topic of suicide causes among youth in Canada. 

Lawrence, Ryan E., et al. “Religion and Suicide Risk: A Systematic Review.” Archives of Suicide Research: Official Journal of the International Academy for Suicide Research, vol. 20, no. 1, 2016, pp. 1–21, https://doi.org/10.1080/13811118.2015.1004494. This systematic review by Ryan E Lawrence, Maria A. Oquendo, and Barbara Stanley examines the relationship between various dimensions of religion, including religious affiliation and attendance at religious services, and different aspects of suicidal behavior, including suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, and completed suicide. The authors found that religious affiliation does not necessarily protect against suicidal ideation, but does appear to protect against suicide attempts, though this may depend on the cultural context and whether the religious affiliation is a majority or minority group. This review incorporates a study conducted on three Canadian high schools which collectively acknowledged that less frequent religion attendance was associated with more suicidal ideation, but this relationship wasn’t as significant when depression risk, substance use, and social support were added to the model. Though according to this review, it still seems to protect against suicide attempts. There are several limitations to this review: it only looked at one database and four sets of search terms, so it might not have included all relevant articles; additionally, because there were so many articles to go through, it was not possible to discuss every one of them in detail. This review is relevant to my study as it highlights the nuanced and multifaceted nature of the religion-suicide relationship, and includes studies conducted on Canadian youth, which is important to consider in my own research on this topic.

Newton, Hunter. “Silhouette of a Person Sitting near Window.” Unsplash, 22 Dec. 2017, unsplash.com/photos/silhouette-of-a-person-sitting-near-window-XLPBiiQtg3U.

“Psychosexual and Psychosocial Theories of Development.” University of Central Florida Pressbooks, University of Central Florida, 2023, pressbooks.online.ucf.edu/lumenpsychology/chapter/lifespan-theories-psychosexual-and-psychosocial-theories. An overview of the psychosexual theory of development by Sigmund Freud and the psychosocial theory of development by Erik Erikson is given in this resource. It emphasizes how these theories’ views on the influence of early childhood experiences and social interactions on personality development are pertinent to the research that is being suggested regarding the childhood factors that influence the suicide rates of Canadian teenagers. The resource highlights Erikson’s theory that the adolescent stage is crucial for forging a solid sense of identity, and it makes the case that challenges in this regard could be a factor in Canada’s high youth suicide rates. The fact that this theoretical framework does not explicitly address the impact of contemporary societal factors, such as the ubiquitous influence of technology and social media, which may further complicate identity formation in contemporary adolescents, is a potential limitation, even though it offers insightful information. However, the resource’s thorough analysis of Erikson’s psychosocial stages offers a helpful prism through which to view the suggested study and gain a deeper understanding of the connections between early experiences and adolescent mental health outcomes.

Rosmarin, David H. “Why Religious Belief Provides a Real Buffer against Suicide Risk.” Psyche, edited by Matt Huston, Aug. 2023, psyche.co/ideas/why-religious-belief-provides-a-real-buffer-against-suicide-risk. David H Rosmarin, an associate professor at Harvard Medical School, a programme director at McLean Hospital in Massachusetts, and the founder of Center for Anxiety, examines the protective role of religious faith against suicide risk. Rosmarin presents evidence from multiple studies showing that religious affiliation and belief in God are associated with substantially lower suicidality, even among non-religious individuals. Rosmarin states that his findings are age-agnostic–none of his previous research has suggested that effects of religion on suicide risk very with age–therfore, his findings could be applied on youth as well. In contrast to Rosmarin’s findings, a particular study by Ryan E Lawrence, Maria A. Oquendo, and Barbara Stanley, demonstrated that high levels of religious activity are occasionally associated with more suicide risk. This article supports the proposed hypothesis, as it suggests that active religious involvement during childhood may reduce suicide risk even after experiencing trauma, as exemplified by Rosmarin’s clinical ancedote about a deeply religious patient named Rebecca who was able to overcome severe OCD and remain resilient in the face of a harrowing family medical crisis due to the protective effects of her religiosity.

Toinel, Ludovic. “Boy Playing at Laptop inside Room.” Unsplash, 23 Aug. 2017, unsplash.com/photos/boy-playing-at-laptop-inside-room-nGwyaWKFRVI.

Zhu, Juncheng, et al. “Social Exclusion and Suicide Intention in Chinese College Students: A Moderated Mediation Model.” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 15, Frontiers Media, Feb. 2024, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1354820. The authors of this article investigate the relationship between social exclusion and suicidal ideation among college students in China. It utilizes a moderated mediation model, suggesting that social exclusion might lead to suicidal thoughts through feelings of depression. Interestingly, the study also explores the moderating effect of “meaning in life.” The findings indicate that a stronger sense of meaning in life can weaken the link between depression and suicidal ideation, even in the presence of social exclusion. This article has several limitations. Firstly, the cross-sectional design can’t confirm if social exclusion causes suicidal thoughts. Secondly, the sample was limited to one region and may not represent the broader population. Finally, the study focused on specific factors and future research could explore additional influences on the link between social exclusion and suicidal ideation. This source indirectly addresses my research question by focusing on social exclusion and suicidal ideation in the presence of other variables, and it provides valuable insights into the mediating role of depression and the “meaning in life”.

